# Algorithm

## Overview
The Hospital Management System is a comprehensive system that is created for public to have a more remote-friendly medical system that satisfies their medical needs without having to visit the hospital in-person. Amidst the current pandemic outspread, many people feel unsafe and worried to step out of their houses, regardless of their health status. Some people might have health issues like fever, cold, body ache, minor accidents, or injuries during this time, but are afraid to consult a doctor personally, especially in the hospital where the virus is most likely to be spread by infected Covid patients. Therefore, I would like to create a hospital system that allows the public to be connected to health care professionals and get assistance whenever they need. 
	
This hospital system will be a complete system that allows both the public and medical professionals, like doctors, nurses, and front desk workers to create an account under this system, and each group or category of user will then be assigned some distinct functionalities to perform different duties or get professional medical assistance available in this hospital system. With the knowledge and big concepts that I have learned from CSCI 24000, I will implement some of the key ideas in this hospital system to create a complete system that contributes to making people’s life easier and more convenient. 

## Goals
The goal of this hospital management system is to create an independant management system that is capable of handling users information, storing the information in a database, and allowing users to access them during run time. Also, the target of this program is to design an interactive system that allows different user types to interact with each other, deal with datas that are dependant on each user type, and form a system that imitates a well-established company. After summarizing my program, I have 11 classes created and defined in total that will contribute to make this Hospital Management System achieve its goals and purposes. Aside from the 11 classes in my program, I have also created 1 interface, 1 abstract class, and 1 enumeration.
	
The first class is the Hospital class. This is the main class that will be handling and dominating all the other classes, calling the necessary methods whenever needed according to the user signed in. This Hospital class will consist of a general menu for all user type since it plays the role of welcoming all users to this hospital program. This main menu will serve to identify the type of user using the hospital system and list all the functionalities available for the users. Based on the type of user selected, the Hospital System will provide the option of creating a new account of that user type or logging in to an existing account that was created before the run time. This program handles four different user types, which include doctors, nurses, front desks, and patients. Doctors, nurses, and front desks are considered admins, so they each will need to provide a code specifically for that admin type before they can create a new account. The patients instead, will not need a code since anyone from the public can create an account with this hospital. After having an account, the program will then direct the user to their respective main menus and carry out the intended functionalities. Aside from that, I have also created another main menu class for each user type to handle all the functionalities available to that specific user type.
	
The next class is the User class. I have decided to implement the concept of an interface for this project and make this class an interface. The reason for this implementation is because every group of users are defined and considered as users, and they will have similarities among themselves, two of which is a username and a password for their account. Every user, whether he/she is a patient, doctor, nurse, or a front desk, will need both credentials to be officially registered as a user under this hospital system. Therefore, it would be reasonable to declare this class as an interface and allow the other classes to implement it. Aside from that, the usernames and passwords created by users are unique to every one of them, so none of the users will share the same username and password. From this interface User class, I will inherit two other classes to implement this class and to classify the users in specific. 
	
The second and third class that I have made is the Patient class and PatientMainMenu class, in which the Patient class implements the previous User class. These two classes are responsible to help the public conduct a list of functionalities available to them that are predefined in this hospital system. The Patient class allows every patient user to create a unique username and password for him/herself, store the diagnosis and prescriptions, medical bills, and scheduled appointments in their own account. Also, each patient will have an array list of appointments to manage their appointments with different doctors in this hospital system.
	
The PatientMainMenu class here, serves as the platform where patients can access all the saved information, together with some other additional functionalities like paying their medical bills, scheduling an appointment with a doctor, and viewing all admins of this hospital. These functionalities are designed specifically to help the public deal with their health issues and provide them with appropriate medical assistance without the need to meet in person unless to show up for a prescheduled appointment and consult a healthcare professional. This hospital system encourages people to perform tasks online whenever possible for both convenience and safety purposes.   
	
The next class to be discussed is the Admin class. This admin class is also an implementation of the User interface class because it uses all the methods declared in the User class. The Admin class is an abstract class that allows a few other classes to be extended from it. All the workers and staff in this hospital are defined as admins, so the admin types that I will include in this program are the doctors, nurses, and front desks. Each type of admin will play a different role in contributing to the hospital, and so every one of them have different functionalities that are designed specific to meet their job needs. In order to deal with this case, abstract class is implemented for the Admin class so that all admin types can share a few common functionalities and modify some special functionalities in their respective classes. 
	
The fourth, fifth, and sixth class that I have created are all extensions of the previous Admin abstract class, which include the Doctor class, Nurse class, and FrontDesk class. Each of these classes will basically perform and execute all the methods defined in the Admin class, but some functionalities are added on top of that depending on the type of admin defined. Besides, I have also created three separate classes that handle each of user type’s main menu as mentioned above. The classes declared here are the DoctorMainMenu class, NurseMainMenu class, and the FrontDeskMainMenu class (seventh, eighth, and nineth class). Similarly, each of the user class will store all the information needed to help them perform different functionalities, while their main menu class is a gateway for them to gain access to information stored in this program, add, or change some information, and update all the changes made before exiting the program. 
	
The Doctor class in this program is for doctors to help patients with any health issues schedule an appointment with them and provide professional medical advice to them. A few additional methods created specifically for doctors are the add prescription method, the add diagnosis method, view appointments scheduled by patients, write a note to other admins, read notifications sent by other admins, delete old messages, and delete past appointment records. Based on the patients’ health condition and the health issues that they encounter; doctors will record their diagnosis of a patient and provide some prescriptions to the respective patient. One other thing that further classify doctors in this hospital system is the doctor’s specialty. Therefore, each doctor will have his/her own specialty, which will be helpful for patients to pick the right doctor for their needs before scheduling an appointment to consult them.
	
For the Nurse class, all nurses will have an account in the hospital system that are instances of this class. The nurses will also be able to send some notes to doctors, other nurses, or front desks about a patient’s information or some important reminder. Also, nurses are allowed to view the prescriptions assigned to patients to understand more about the patient’s health status, as well as to read and delete the notes delivered by other admins, view patients scheduled appointments, and list all patients registered in this hospital system. 
	
Next, the FrontDesk class is a class for front desk workers working at the hospital. The users defined in this class play a significant role to keep the hospital system organized and running smoothly. The functionalities added to this class on top of the Admin class is to view the appointment scheduled by patients, delete and add a patient from/to the hospital system database, adding medical bills for each patient, writing a note to an admin, reading the notes sent by other admins, and adding a memo for themselves to help manage this hospital system. 
	
Then, the tenth class that I have created is the Time class. This class is made specifically to deal with all the appointment dates and times. The patients will be scheduling appointments with the doctors in this hospital system, so it would be reasonable to create a class to handle all the appointment times. Also, the doctors will be able to view the appointments that they have with patients, so organizing the date and time well is crucial in keeping this hospital system organized. This class will have a year, a month, a day, and an hour which are integer attributes, as well as a string attribute to specify whether the time is in Ante meridiem (a.m.) or Post meridiem (p.m.). Aside from having the attributes to store the day, month, year, hour, and period, there is also a special method that I have defined in this class that combines all the attributes stored in that instance and printing it out as a string. This would be helpful in presenting the dates to both the users and admins who have permission to access the information. Also, for each of these attributes, there will be a setter and a getter method to access the variables in this class by encapsulation.
	
With the Time class created, I then created my last class for this program (eleventh class), called the Appointment class. This class is a class that uses the Time class as an object to handle the date and time portion of the appointment. Aside from that, this class will also have the name of the patient who scheduled the appointment, alongside with a short note included by the patient as a brief message to let the doctor know why he/she wants to consult the doctor. For this project, I will be utilizing database to store user information and files to output some information like the patients’ appointment schedule, prescriptions, diagnosis, medical bills, or notes and messages sent between doctors, nurses, and front desk workers for communication purposes. 

## Input
This hospital management program mostly takes inputs from the user as choices of what the user wants to do. At the start of the program, users will input their respective user type to identify themselves as one of the user types. Then, the program will direct the user to either either log in to their existing account or create a new one if they are new to the system. The user will then input their choice, entering a unique username, password, and their full name so that the system recognizes them as a user. Then, depending on their user type, the program will lead them to their respective user type main menu, which has a list of functinalities they can do. They will then continue to input their choices to perform the intended tasks, like scheduling an appointment with a doctor, viewing all admins in the hospital, paying medical bills, getting diagnosis and prescriptions, and viewing their appointment records as a patient. If they are admins, they can also do a list of tasks that are designed specifically for them, like to set prescriptions and diagnosis as a doctor, add or delete users as a front desk, and view patient's info and admin's list as a nurse. These functionalities are available to them and they can decide what to do by inputting the choice. 

Aside from that, another important part of the system that utilizes the input function heavily is the appointment scheduler for patients. In order to schedule an appointment, users have to be extra careful in inputting the right integer values to make the date and time reasonable. For instance, there are months in a year that have 31 days, while others have 30 days, and also one special month with 28 days (or 29 days for a leap year), so this depends on the user input to make the most reasonable input answer as possible. The program will always check for the validity of the date, with an algorithm designed to calculate the day in a week from only the year, month, and day inputted by the user. If the user enters something invalid, the proram will spot out the mistake and notify the user so that all appointments are valid and accurate according to the real world time. 

Lastly, another important part that depends a lot on the user input is the medical bill part of this system. Based on how the program is designed, the patient can pay their medical bills either by the full amount or partially from the total amount. If the user is not ready to make a full amount payment and would like to pay a part of the medical bill, the system allows the user to do so, and so the user must be smart in making choices and inputting the right choice that fits their current circumstances. Also, as a front desk worker, he/she can add a medical bill for a patient after the patient consulted a doctor and got a prescription given by the doctor. The front desk has to input the right amount as the patients bill to prevent conflicts and misunderstanding among patients and the admins. After completing the tasks each user intends to do, they can input and choose to exit the program by selecting the sign out option, which will lead the program to save all changes made and get the user to sign out of his/her account.

## Output
In short, the user experience walking through the system will start from the main screen of the hospital system. When the program is compiled and ran at first, the console will output a warm welcome message that prompts the user to either create a new account if they do not have an existing account or log in to their pre-created account before conducting a list of tasks designed for them. Based on the user’s choice, if they are creating an account with the hospital for the first time, the program will continue outputting questions to identify the user either as an admin or a patient. 

If he/she is defined to be an admin, the program will prompt the user to enter a specific code to be registered as a specific type of admin for security purposes. A doctor will have the code DOCCSCI240, a nurse will have the code NURCSCI240, and the front desk workers will have a code of FDCSCI240. If the user is a patient, he/she will be directed to the patient main menu after finished creating an account with a unique username and password. If the user is recognized to be an admin, the program will take the admin to their respective main menus. The three types of admins will each have a different main menu with distinct functionalities available to them. The program will be able to identify the admins and patients at that point and output the main menus that are specially designed for each of the user type and prompts the users to enter their choice for the next step.

From there, based on the list of tasks available to each user in their main menu, they can continue working on the task available to them by the program and repeat the same process until they hit the sign out choice. There are a lot of options for users to choose from, and the program will output the results of the users' choices to them. If the user is a patient, he/she can schedule an appointment with a doctor, and the program will assist the user in making that appointment scheduler work in a step-by-step manner. The program will only proceed to the next step after getting a valid feedback from the user and when the appointment is successfully scheduled, the program will output a summary of that appointment, which includes the date and time, the name, and the doctor whom the patient scheduled an appointment with. Also, the user can select the option to view their appointment record in their main menu, in which the program will output their array list of appointments in a formatted manner. Besides that, the program can also output a list of admin and patient users who have created an account in hospital system in a formatted manner, which is one of the functionalities that the system is made to execute. Another important feature that the program outputs is the notes, messages, and memos that are designed for admins to communicate between each other. Each admin type will have the option to send a message or a note to another admin, and the note will be outputted in a formatted manner to the recipient. This output function is crucial in the system as it plays an important role to deliver important messages to another healthcare professional.

After the users are done with their obligations with this hospital system, they will choose to sign out of their account. At that time, the program will save all the changes made since it is a serializable program and outputs a short message on console screen to thank the user before ending the program. 

## Step
After concluding my program, I have created a total of 11 classes for this entire hospital management system. For my first main Hospital class, I have defined 4 vectors. Each vector was utilized to handle and manage one type of user, namely the patients, doctors, nurses, and the front desk workers. After having these vectors declared and defined, I loaded the vectors up with a few initial users that I have created beforehand just so I have something to work on, and the hospital can start to operate from there. Aside from that, I declared an instance of every user class that I have in my program so that I can pass the information of one user more efficiently rather than having to deal with the whole vectors. Two Scanner objects were also declared to help me take input from the user effectively.
	
Then, the program will prompt the user to enter his/her user type before they either log in to an existing account or create a new account if the user does not have one. This is for security purposes just to prevent the public from creating an admin’s account and gain access to all the patients’ information that are stored in this hospital system. After that, users will be logging in to their respective accounts or create a new one with a unique username and password that is never the same for other patients and admins. After having the registration part done, depending on the type of user logged in, the respective main menu will be presented on the screen for the user, and the user can pick the task or things that they intend to accomplish through this system. This step will continue to repeat in a loop until users are done with their purpose of visiting this hospital system and select the sign out choice in the program. Before the program ends, all changes made by the user will be saved by writing the vectors into a file using the concept of serialization.

Next, the User class and the Admin class will not be instantiated since the User class is an interface, while the Admin class is an abstract class. These two classes act as a reference for the users included in this program. For instance, the User class provides a default guideline for the Admin and Patient class. The User class have attributes of three strings, which include a username, a password, and a name. These three attributes are essential and are required for every user to have to use this hospital system. For the methods in this class, there are setter and getter methods declared for each of the attributes mentioned before. Also, every class that implements this User class also has setter and getter for the three attributes. In regard to the Admin class, most of the methods and attributes are similar to the User class, except for an additional attribute added to it to distinct the admin user types from the patient (or public). This attribute is called a code, which is basically a special string code assigned to each admin type that distinguishes them from each other as well as the public.  
	
Besides that, another class that implements the User class is the Patient class. This class have all the attributes of the User class, with a few other attributes like an array list of appointments, a diagnosis string, a prescription string, and a float medical bill. Again, a getter and setter were created for each of the attributes. Aside from the methods mentioned, an additional method called paymedical_bill() was also included in this class that serves as one of the functionalities available for patients to pay their medical bills. These are helpful methods for patients to fulfill their obligations in a more efficient and effective way. Another class that I have created for patient users is called the PatientMainMenu class. This class serves as a main menu that guides patients in accessing their information, conducting some tasks, and getting the most out of this system. This PatientMainMenu class has three methods, each to display and output the information of one admin user type. For instance, one method is to output the list of doctors working at the hospital with some information about the doctors like their specialty. This same method applies to the other two admin type (nurses and front desks). Also, this class has two objects of the Time class to help us handle the appointment times while the patient is scheduling an appointment with a doctor.

After that, there are three classes who are extending the Admin class, which are the Doctor class, Nurse class, and FrontDesk class. All these classes are like their parent abstract class, with some additional attributes and methods built on top of it. The Doctor class has some new attributes defined for them, which include a new array list of string notifications to receive important messages from nurses and front desks, a specialty string to classify them with their specialized medical field, and an array list of Appointment instances to handle the appointments scheduled for them by the patient. Also, a doctor has methods to get and set the specialty attribute, to set and read the array list of notification string, to delete a notification from the array list, and to add an appointment to the array list of appointments. Aside from this Doctor class, another class called DoctorMainMenu was also created and designed to fit the needs of a doctor to perform the methods listed above. This doctor’s main menu has similar methods as the PatientMainMenu class, with just an additional method to view a patient’s info. This method is very helpful for doctors to keep track of their patients’ diagnosis and prescriptions, so they can always refer to this information whenever they need. 
	
Next, the FrontDesk class also has an additional array list of string memo as its attribute on top of the attributes declared in the parent class. This memo array list is created so that other admins can send them a note and for the front desk to make a self-reminder for him/herself on things to accomplish. The front desks play an important role in this system, so more functionalities were designed specifically for them to meet their job needs. For instance, there will be an add memo, delete memo, and read memo method to handle all the memos that are stored in their account either delivered by other admins or added by themselves. Also, just like all the other user classes, I have created an additional FrontDeskMainMenu class for the front desk to help organize my codes better and to visualize the front desk users’ interface experience. In this main menu class, an additional compare username and compare password methods were created to make sure that no username and password are repeated among any type of user. The two comparison methods were utilized when a front desk creates a new account for either an admin or a patient who comes to register at the hospital. This is relatively helpful to avoid confusion in the hospital system and prevent outsiders from compromising the hospital system. Also, the front desk has the functionality to view a patient’s info, a doctor’s appointment record, as well as a patient’s appointment record through this system so that they are aware of the entire hospital’s operation and schedules. 
	
Finally, the Nurse class is like other admin user type classes, with just slight difference in the array list of note string as its extra attribute. Again, this note array list is like the messages that we receive from social media platforms, where the nurses will receive messages or notes from other admins that are related to the operations of the hospital. Having an array list of notes like this stored in the account is very handy for communication purposes. Admins who have an account with this hospital can now use this system to send messages and communicate effectively without the need of any other applications or websites. This makes the hospital more independent of other software and can assist all users in fulfilling their obligations and job needs. The NurseMainMenu class created for nurse users is just like the methods in doctor’s main menu, with a method to list the patient’s info, and to list all patients and admins who have registered an account with this hospital. 
	
In general, each of the main menu class has a null parameter constructor and a constructor that takes a user class and four vectors of different objects as their parameters. Also, some functionalities available to the users were not defined as methods apart from the constructor, so most of the functionalities are defined within the constructor itself. For instance, the doctor main menu class has the functionality to view his/her own appointment records, delete the records, read, delete, and send a message to an admin, as well as to set diagnosis and prescriptions for a patient. However, these functionalities were not flashed out as methods that are separated from the constructor. The nurse main menu instead, has the functionalities to add, read, and delete a note delivered by other admins that are not declared as different methods within a class. The front desks in this system have the option to add, delete, and view any user type’s account as well as their information. They can also send, read, and delete the memo (or messages) sent by other colleagues or by themselves as reminders. Lastly, for the patient main menu, they can view all admins in the hospital, view and delete their appointment records, and schedule an appointment with a doctor.
	
Finally, the Time class and the Appointment class are closely related to each other, so I will be discussing the two classes together. The Time class is basically a class that handles dates and times, which will be instantiated in the Appointment class as one of its attributes. This Time class is crucial for an appointment because an appointment will not be valid without an actual date, day, and time. The time class has all the getter and setter methods for each of its attributes, that include the year integer, month integer, day integer, hour integer, and “AM or PM” integer. This is a good way to practice encapsulation since it hides all the private data members from public, so it would be more difficult for us to access them, but they are at a much safer position when accessed.

The Appointment class on the other hand, has a four main attributes. That includes the start time (Time object), the end time (Time object), a string name, and a string note. This is the basic data members that an appointment should have to provide sufficient information to both the doctor and the patients themselves. Also, each of these attributes has a getter and a setter method that are useful in accessing the data members stored in the object.


Before I started coding this program, a UML diagram and a makefile was created to better understand the relationships between the abstract parent classes and the child classes that are inherited from these parent classes. After having everything set, the program is ran and compiled to check for errors, and a few user instances were created just to show that the program does what it is intended to do as if it was used by a user. 